1.9 docs: Slint language philosophy (#7039)
slint-ui/slint: docs/astro/src/content/docs/guide/language/concepts/slint-language.mdx

description: Slint Language
---

import Link from '/src/components/Link.astro';

> The concepts section of the guide are to give you an overview of the language from a high level. If you want to
> dive straight in then the details then the <Link type="slintFile" label="coding section"/> and language reference
> sections are the best places to start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The objective of the concepts section of the guide is to give you an overview of the language from a high level. If you want to
dive straight in then the details check out the the <Link type="slintFile" label="coding section"/> and language reference
sections.
```

> This section is to give you an insight into the thinking behind the language and the core concepts it is made up from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section gives you an insight into the thinking behind the language and the core concepts it is made up from.
```

## Why Slint?

> The Slint language helps you to describe the User Interface of your application in a declarative way.

Reviewer: Suggestion for more direct and actionable phrasing. We're not just here to "help", this _is_ the way we want you to do it :)

```suggestion
With the Slint language you describe the User Interface of your application in a declarative way.
```

or

```suggestion
The Slint language describes your application's User Interface in a declarative way.
```

> The reasons for this are that first a User Interface is quite different from abstract code. It's made up 

Reviewer: I'd go straight for the bold statement. Otherwise I ask myself: "Reasons for what?" and "What's the second, after first"? :-)

```suggestion
A User Interface is quite different from abstract code. It's made up 
```

of text, images, colors, animations, and so on. Even though it's a mirage, the buttons and elements do not
really exist in the physical world, it's meant to look and behave as if it does. Buttons have pressed effects,
lists can be flicked and behave as if they had real inertia. When being designed they are described in terms

> of UI components, forms and views. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of UI components, forms, and views. 
```

> Meanwhile the world of code is a quite different abstraction. It's made up of functions, variables, and so on.
> Even when some aspects of a UI exist such as buttons and menus they also go hand in hand with a lot of code to
> manage the implementation details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meanwhile, the world of code is a quite different abstraction. It's made up of functions, variables, and so on.
Even when some aspects of a UI exist, such as buttons and menus, they also go hand in hand with a lot of code to
manage the implementation details.
```

```js
const button = document.createElement('button');
button.textContent = 'Click me';
document.body.appendChild(button);
```

> Take this simple web example. A button is created. Then a property to show 'Click me' text is text. At this point

Reviewer: I think we should try to avoid "easy" and "simple", as that's quite subjective. But this is definitely short :-)

```suggestion
Take this short web example. A button is created. Then a property to show 'Click me' text is text. At this point
```

technically the button exists, but it won't show up as its not attached to anything. So the final line

> makes it a parent of the main view. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
makes it a child of the main view. 
```

```js
const buttonWithListener = document.createElement('button');
buttonWithListener.textContent = 'Click me';
buttonWithListener.addEventListener('click', () => {
    console.log('Button clicked!');
});
document.body.appendChild(buttonWithListener);
```

> In this second example a button is created and an event listener is added. Within that is a callback
> function to log out that the button is pressed. It's a lot of code to so simple things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this second example, a button is created and an event listener is added. Within that is a callback
function to log out that the button is pressed. It's a lot of code to so simple things.
```

> Its quite abstract. For example once a few more buttons and components are added its almost impossible
> to be able to think how the real interface would look. It's hard to think about the design of a UI
> using this kind of code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its quite abstract: For example once a few more buttons and components are added, its almost impossible
to be able to think how the real interface would look. It's hard to think about the design of a UI
using this kind of code.
```

> It's also too complex to edit without understanding how to code. This means UI designers cannot work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's also too complex to edit without understanding how to code. This means UI designers can't work
```

> hands on to ensure all their design intent is implemented. They are forced to use other tools and frameworks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hands on to ensure all their design intent is implemented. They're forced to use other tools and frameworks
```

> to crate prototypes and design guides that may look or behave differently to the software used to implementat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to create prototypes and design guides that may look or behave differently to the software used to implement
```

> the production UI. It should not have to be this way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the production UI. It shouldn't have to be this way.
```

> ## Declartive style

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Declarative Style
```

> There have been attempts to make describing a UI in code more declarative. For example [React](https://reactjs.org/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There've been attempts to make describing a UI in code more declarative. For example [React](https://reactjs.org/)
```

> and [SwiftUI](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/swiftui/).

Reviewer 2: and *cough* QML 🙊

```jsx
function ContentView() {
  return (
    <p style={{ fontSize: '2rem', color: 'green' }}>
      Hello World
    </p>
  );
}
```

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: some View {
        Text("Hello World")
            .font(.title)
            .foregroundColor(.green)
    }
}
```

> These languages take normal code and let it be used in a declartive way. But it's 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These languages take normal code and let it be used in a declarative way. But it's 
```

still functions with arguments that act as properties. It is simpler and behaviour
such as parent child relationships can be inferred. 

> For Slint instead of tweaking a normal language to be more declarative we instead 
> created a pure declarative language from the ground up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Slint, instead of tweaking a normal language to be more declarative we 
created a pure declarative language from the ground up.
```

## The Business Logic Problem

One attempt to solve the problem of describing a UI in code has been to create a separate static markup language.
Platforms such as Android and [WPF](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/desktop/wpf/) have done this. The UI

> is described in an XML like format. While the rest of the code is written in both a separate language and also 
> separate files. Known as a code behind file. The issue here is that XML, despite claims to the contrary, is not 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is described in an XML like format, while the rest of the code is written in both a separate language and also 
separate files. Known as a code behind file. The issue here is that XML, despite claims to the contrary, isn't 
```

human readable or editable. It's also too static and rigid and it can be frustrating to jump between the UI file
and the separate code behind file to describe the behavior of the UI.

> Meanwhile the React web framework has solved this problem by using JSX. HTML, CSS and JavaScript can be mixed 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Meanwhile the React web framework has solved this problem by using JSX. HTML, CSS, and JavaScript can be mixed 
```

together in a single file. On one hand this is great as it means you can use the same language to describe the UI

> layout and behavior. On the other hand there is no limit to what code you can put in a JSX file. Logic for handling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layout and behavior. On the other hand there's no limit to what code you can put in a JSX file. Logic for handling
```

network requests, processing data and pretty much anything quickly ends up mixed in with UI code. It leads to an
issue where it can be fast to create an initial application, but it becomes so hard to maintain that it's too
slow or costly to evolve the application.

## A True Declarative UI Language

> Slint provides a declarative language to describe an applications user interface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slint provides a declarative language to describe your application's user interface:
```

```slint showLineNumbers=true no-test
Rectangle {
    Button {
        text: "Click me!";
        clicked => {
            debug("Button clicked!");
        }
    }
}
```

> If you can understand this Slint code you already have grasped a majority of how simple to use the language is.

Reviewer: Tricky as I contradict myself here, but yes, let's advertise "simple" once here ;-)

```suggestion
If you can understand this Slint code, then you've already grasped a majority of how simple to use the language is.
```

> On line 2 we declare a Button. On line 3 its `text` property is set to `"Click me!"` and on line 4 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On line 2 we declare a `Button`. On line 3 we set its `text` property to `"Click me!"` and on line 4 
```

> callback is set to print out "Button clicked!" to the console via the built in `debug` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we set a callback to print out "Button clicked!" to the console via the built in `debug` function.
```

The Slint compiler will take this code and see it needs to generate a Rectangle that has a Button as a child.

> Similarly that when the clicked callback activates it will run the `debug` function. There is no need to think

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, when the clicked callback activates, it will run the `debug` function. There is no need to think
```

about component and even listener life cycles.

With the Slint language you can think much more closely to how a user interface looks and behaves. Instead of
describing the 'how', the how should the details be implemented in traditional code, you instead "declare" how
the interface should look and behave. Hence Slint being a 'declarative UI language'.

It's not only simpler for software developers to use, it's also now something designers can potentially edit or 
more easily contribute to.

Slint isn't the first declarative UI language, but it takes advantage of being able to learn from earlier more
complex attempts that hinted at the potential of a declarative UI language to finalize into a modern and complete
system.

At first glance it has the simplicity of a static markup language, but with a modern take that removes things like

> angle brackets and tags. But also dynamic features such as complex property expressions, functions, callbacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
angle brackets and tags. But also dynamic features such as complex property expressions, functions, callbacks,
```

and automatic reactivity. However these can only be used in the context of what helps a UI component. If you want

> to make network requests, process data or many other things that count as 'business logic' then those have to live

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to make network requests, process data, or many other things that count as 'business logic' then those have to live
```
